---
layout: post
title:  "Soft Shapes Part 1"
---
One of the questions I (Snoof) get asked most often, is how I translate flat fabric pieces into 3D shapes. It's a fair question; I make a lot of soft toys and I work hard at trying to shape them so they make sense. It isn't, however, a question I know how to answer.

I'm about to embark on another Shape Quest, so I thought maybe I'd take the STEAMengineers blog with me in case I happen across some answers, too.

First things first - I don't have an answer because I never realised there might be one. I just decided at various times to make various soft toys, and I just experimented until I got the shapes I wanted. Sometimes I won, sometimes I lost; that's absolutely still true, and still a major draw for me; I'm in competition with the universe and even though it always wins in the end, I'll get some jabs in.

The process, for me, is its own reward. I never understood the people who just want to rush through, or outsource the process to software, or to other people. I'm here for the actual bit where things don't match up and I redesign and recut and there's fluff in my ears and the legs are too narrow to turn and I've lost the plot entirely... And the bit where I turn something inside in for the first time and see that it's worked better than I expected, too... Once the project's finished, I more or less lose interest. There's a pile of soft toys on my bedroom desk that I'm contemplating rehoming because I've made them now... What's next?

Because of this, I've developed the skill we're talking about very organically. I've dropped some (many) clangers, I've come out victorious or semi-victorious or good-enough-why-not more often than not, and every time I've learned some obscure new technique.

The flat shapes you use to make a 3D shape vary in size, usually according to the level of detail you want (sometimes, as with the raccoon I made recently, according to the design you want). Sometimes, you can manipulate the size of some of the pieces to adjust the behaviour of the others - like when I made a caterpillar, and used the smaller belly pieces to help the top pieces curve inwards. And other times, you'll be completely betrayed by the process.

But if you're anything like me, you WILL have fun!

I'll gather some illustrative images and whatever's left of my sanity, and we'll see what we can find.
